the idea that going through the birth
canal
is really building your microbiome it's
becoming
clear because a lot of the time people
born with
cesarean sections for example they don't
have the same
microbiome as those that are born
natural way
hey everybody i hope you enjoyed this
episode brought to you by
our sponsors at blinkist
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr mahmoud ganum
considered one of the world's leading
experts on the microbiome he's published
an astounding
400 scientific papers and has been cited
by more than 20
000 different papers and other
scientists his work is so
foundational to our understanding of the
microbiome that he actually coined the
term
mycobiome which is probably the perfect
place for us to start
so um dr ghanim please walk people
through
exactly what the microbiome is and how
it's
different or a piece of the microbiome i
think that'd be really helpful
wait first of all i'd like to thank you
for having me it's a great pleasure
so the microbiome you know the study of
fungus
it's mycology okay that's why we say
microbiome which means it's the mic
fungal community that lives in our body
we know that we have microbes in our
skin
in our gut in our mouth all over our
body
people used to think it's all bacteria
and really they used to use the term
microbiome to refer to bacteria but in
fact
in addition to the bacterial community
we have fungal community we have viruses
we have parasites so the fungus there
we call it the microbiome yeah this is
something you don't hear a lot of people
talk about
but you've got obviously microbes you've
got
fungi you've got phages which i know
virtually nothing about and you've got
viruses
which sound bad so it'd be really
interesting
to to begin to understand what role each
of them play
how they're working in harmony and then
obviously we'll get into dysbiosis
where it all goes wrong and then be
great to talk about how we
you know get ourselves into an ideal
state yeah i think you bring
really very important point because
people sometimes
think that these microbes living in our
god
they live alone in fact they are like in
a sandbox
where kids come together and they start
to play
so that's exactly what happens between
bacteria
and fungus they come work together
to our good or our bad when they
are in harmony we have
good health while if they become
fighting together in a way then you
have a number of health issues and
conditions so in a way we need to look
at
the microbiome as totality because
all of these organisms like a garden
they left together there and they
interact
and as i mentioned when they are in good
good friendship good you can get along
with people
you help us and if not we are in trouble
yeah so seven ish years ago let's say i
didn't i didn't even know the word
microbiome i had never heard of it i had
no sense
of what it was and then my wife went
through a very profound
um state of dysbiosis of course we
didn't know what it was
we didn't know it was dysbiosis it was
really crazy
and through all of this um it was really
hard to wrap my head around what's going
on
and i think that an analogy perhaps that
will help people
enter this is once you realize that a
forest
like a real forest is below the ground
communicating and sharing resources
and withholding resources treating their
own offspring one way
responding to something maybe a far
afield
in the forest like a fungal overgrowth
or something
by sending sort of toxins that way when
i started hearing about that
it's easy for me to understand it at
that macro level where i can imagine the
root system i can imagine the biology of
it if that makes sense
and when i started thinking about okay
in our gut it's happening at
at a microscopic level but is the
analogy of the forest
communicating under the soil is that
pretty accurate for what's going on
in our gut i really like that analogy
i try to sometimes use the garden in our
backyard but it's exactly the same
because if you think about it as you
said
we see that bacteria and fungus
they help the roots of a of a plant
which really allows it to have more
nutrients and make it
grow and give us all the shade we need
okay so so that's the same exactly what
happened in our gut
these organisms they work together and
there are beneficial organisms
such as let's say in bacteria
lactobacillus
and there are bad organisms and for this
example i'm going to give you candida
which is a fungus
the good thing about lactobacillus it
keeps candida under control
okay so that's why what we would like to
do in the garden
or in the forest for that matter is try
to
encourage the growth of the good
microbes
and try to inhibit the bad microbes
otherwise we'll start to have rust and
smart
and other plant diseases which you see
in the forest
all right so i want to keep going with
this analogy because
one thing i've found in my life is once
i can imagine
the process the biology of it i can
begin to make
far wiser choices because i understand
the chain of cause and effect
so i'd really like to understand better
at a simplified level if you had to
assign percentages when we're digesting
food
how much of it is the body itself is
producing enzymes or whatever
and how much of it is the um the garden
or the forest
of our bacteria
fungi phages viruses like that interplay
they're working together
so that um if i had to just swing a
guess
i would say we're probably in like a an
80 20 or a 90 10 split where your body's
doing really very little
and then the the garden is doing the
rest is that pretty accurate
you know in a way it depends of what you
on what you are defining
if we are talking about let's say we eat
something
okay such as sugar for example
our body try to break it down and this
sort of thing however
the microbes such as fungus start to use
it and overgrow
but really when you think about it
what's nice about
the bacteria and the fungus in our body
is that let's say you eat a fiber
because i always like to encourage the
growth of good
bacteria and they love fiber and they
break it down our body does not break it
down
so it goes through our intestine down to
the large intestine and then start
breaking it down and what they do
they produce these metabolites i'll give
you an example short chain
fatty acids it's basically fatty acid
with short
chains as it says you know and
those have been shown to play very
important role in supporting our
immunity for example
also by breaking down this this food
and producing some of these metabolites
there are
a large number as you can imagine of
products are produced you know they also
can
communicate with our brain remember
bacteria also can produce vitamins
so in a way we have a factory
of chemical factory in fact where we
produce
all these compounds some of them will
affect our
immune system some of them will help our
nutrition like vitamins obviously this
is good
in nutrient now if we look at these
organisms when they are in harmony they
really are doing
good stuff together okay and let me give
you an example about this
for when we eat a
complex carb let's say candida
breaks it down and then what it gives it
gives a byproduct
and this by-product is used by bacteria
to produce
other by-products which can it's really
complete the circle
where candida can use so they work
together
to for their benefit and also
our benefit when they are good guys yeah
that that to me really begins to clarify
why it's so important to um get that
harmony right between the different
elements of the microbiome because once
you understand that what you're really
uptaking into the body is the byproduct
of
them their balance right so who's in
there
so if one guy is producing something
that is not helpful for us and the other
species is producing vitamins for
instance it's like okay well clearly
if i have bad producer over here and
he's proliferating
and i've got my vitamin producer over
here and they don't
exist then or they're you know greatly
diminished through whatever
high stress antibiotic use you know
whatever
bad diet whatever the case may be then
it's like well the metabolites that are
being produced by the chemical factory
like you were talking about
they're producing the wrong thing and so
now i'm getting sick
now i'm fatigued now i have mood
disorder
and a lot of what's being produced is
what i've heard referred to as a
signaling molecule
so it in understanding all of that
for me it was like okay now i can
picture why
i need to eat certain things why i need
to avoid certain things because it comes
down to
what is the the forest
or the garden what is it communicating
so if it's creating not just building
blocks it's also creating
communication elements that say do this
do that turn this on turn that off
it's like whoa this becomes a very
complicated
um symphony exactly i think you bring
out a very important point which is the
communication
before we always thought that our brain
tells us what to do now with the
microbiome
we know there is bi-directional
communication it's two-way
street here our brain can tell our god
but our gut also can tell our brain and
where they influence
each other okay so in a way that's
what's happening it's not only
just producing as you say product it's
the signaling which you mentioned
there are of course some ways uh where
we have
cytokines which some of the immune
elements like anti-inflammatory
cytokines they are substances
that can either be anti-inflammatory
which means they help our body to fight
inflammation
and some of them when for example an
organism
that produce ielts 6 or interleukin 6.
this is a bad cytokine because it's
associated a lot of the time
with inflammation what i would like to
have in my body
i want to feed the good microbes so that
they grow
and they produce effect on our immune
system so that we have more
anti-inflammatory cytokines i don't want
to have something like for example
some organism that can produce i
mentioned remember
interleukin 6 which is a bad guy
because when this happens it could
affect our brain
will start to producing more cortisol
also and of course having more cortisol
we're gonna have more depression for
example
so it's really i like your view
is that it's a complex it is not a
simple way it's like biology
biology is always complex yeah so
um let's start at at birth you've gotten
into some really interesting stuff
around
um autism so i encountered not too long
ago the idea that
the the microbiome begins to get
populated at birth
by going through the vaginal canal and
that becomes sort of the
the seeding of this garden one i'd love
to understand what
the research is showing about autism and
it's linked to the microbiome
and then also what is that chain of
events how do we go from
when we're a fetus is there any
microbiome or is it
literally zero and then it becomes
populated um
as you go through the vaginal canal how
does that work yeah
i think before we used to be to think
it's zero but now there are studies to
show
no even when you are there there is some
microbes and
obviously it is not a mature microbiome
you know what i mean as you come out
from the birth canal
you get more and then as you are fed for
example
breastfeeding and whatever you add more
more variety
and the first few months you are really
building
that microbiome but then after
let's say six months or something it
becomes more and more stable
than when we first start and the idea
that going through the birth canal
is really building your microbiome it's
becoming
clear because a lot of the time people
born with
caesarean sections for example they
don't have the same
microbiome as those that are born
natural way
so it's my understanding that the rate
of autism jumps something like 30
percent
uh if you were born via c-section is
that accurate
you know you are touching on an area
which i just
completed a very big study so
what we did we wanted to look at
uh autistic kids to try to see is there
a difference
in between their microbiome as well as
their siblings compared to their sibling
siblings so we had about 81
subjects mainly 50 some
autistic and the rest their siblings and
we really compared
their microbiome both not only bacteria
but also fungus because i you know i'm a
fungi i like to look at fungus
so we found that there is
imbalance between the sibling who are
healthy
and those with autistic and we found
really very interesting
data which i recently presented at the
international center for
autism research where we found for
example
the bacteria and autistic kids they have
a reduction in one particular which is
important in breaking down
fibers okay and that's why most probably
these kids really are very fussy about
what eating and they have difficulty
gastrointestinal
issues like 40 up to 40 autistic kids
have
gi issues or gastrointestinal issues
okay
we also found other organisms
not only with bacteria but with fungus
that are different as well so now what
we are trying to do
is try to understand how
we can balance these organisms okay
and it's amazing both bacteria and
fungus play
a role in these autistic kids and one
factor which again i am now currently
doing is
we found a bacteria that is able to
produce
biofilms biofilms is like the plaque in
our teeth is a biofilm
we have what we call digestive plaque
but we found
this this organism really to be
also elevated in these uh
autistic kids you know that's
interesting i think you're gonna have to
explain to people why
um biofilms are so potentially dangerous
um
because that you want to talk about
something that scares me biofilms
scare me so let me tell you i did a
study in 2016
i looked at crohn's disease patients
and we found that they have
imbalance in both bacteria and fungus
we found that they have an elevated
level of e coli
issues equilibrium they have syracia
marcissens which is also pathogenic
bacteria
at the same time we found that there is
an increase of candida tropicalis
and guess what we we are lucky because
we have in our
lab 30 000 different
organisms so we were able to go get
those and put them together
and guess what they did they formed a
big biofilm
so what is the issue with biofilms in
our gut
it's similar to plaque in our teeth
but in the god when they form the spiral
it's like
a shadow just to make people visualize
what it is it's like a jello
and inside this yellow we have little m
m's or little raisins for example so
these raisins and mmms
are the microbes whereas the shallow
is what they produce they produce a
material called
matrix okay and this matrix
as if it is like really you can imagine
it is very difficult to get into the
raisins
because of this matrix you have to dig
in and and take them
so that's what happens in our gut they
go
and on the epithelial cell lining which
you mentioned
they form a thick biofilm
so you ask me so what does that mean
what it means
it covers first of all when they are
living these
bad organisms equalize russia
as well as candida living there they
become protected
against antimicrobial agents against our
immune system
they are really bad guys they working
together
to start damage our lining you know
epithelial cell lining
and then of course when they do that
they we are going to have
gastrointestinal issues which we of
course crohn's disease is a
excellent example but in addition to
causing this harm also by covering the
epithelial lining we will not have
nutrient absorption
as well as an efficient way so we would
start to have
you know less nutrients and whatever and
all the associated factors so you can
eat but essentially starve to death
yeah that that was what was happening to
my wife i can't say whether it was
um due to biofilm or not but
man it was gnarly like she was eating
and she looked malnourished her hair
started falling out
her nails were brittle it was crazy it
was super scary
and this was again this was back i had
to learn about the microbiome
specifically because of what she was
going through so it just felt
so impossibly complicated now one thing
um because
she has improved dramatically
but the thing that i will say i keep in
my back pocket because she
isn't like a teenager who can eat
whatever they want like she has to be
really careful she tells me that she
still
is in sort of a compromised situation
her garden too many things have died
there's not enough diversity
so the thing i have in my back pocket is
fmt so the first time i heard about it i
could not believe that fecal microbial
transplant was real
that we were quite literally taking the
excrement out of one human and putting
it into another
that just struck me as so terrifying um
but it it has shown some real promise
where is the state of fmt how often do
you
recommend people to try it in a clinical
setting where they're actually helping
somebody
i think the most really valuable data we
got from
fmt is in uh c diff
c difficile you know the infection in
the gut
and it was amazing the first time i was
in a meeting scientific meeting
i was listening to a professor from the
university of virginia
and he talked about he did 76
patients he transferred them with fecal
transplant from donors who are healthy
and lo and behold they had a huge
success
you know so to me that was really
a good proof that by getting the right
microbiome
you are gonna get rid of those issues
also other studies with respect to fmt
is they you know a lot of studies in
animals where for example
they took some fecal transplant
from a slim mouth
and gave it to an obese one and they
were able
to become the obese become thin again
you know what i mean
so this is fantastic now you ask me a
question where are we with that
and now the trend is can we get
a subset of organisms that we know like
like probiotic type of organisms that we
know they are gonna
rebalance our gut and help us and i
would say
in the coming few years that would be
more that trend
than the fmt meaning we're going to go
in
isolate the balanced
grouping of microbes the whole thing the
microbes the fungi the phages the
viruses
and into something that's pure and
isolatable
and we're going to give them to people
is that
exactly exactly and how do we place them
in so if
um fmt i've heard two ways one
encapsulated meaning you actually
swallow the tablet
and then two basically like an endoscopy
where you go in and sort of
do they start all the way up at the top
of the small
intestines and small intestine yeah yeah
what i think is gonna happen is
a capsule fall but it's not gonna have
all the organisms that they are gonna
that we find in in somebody's who is
healthy what we are gonna do
is we are gonna identify what are the
most important organisms
that will be able to maintain if
number one to rebalance and then
maintain our microbiome
so and that's for people that don't
understand like the difference between
well that just sounds like a probiotic
so what's the difference between what
you're talking about
and a probiotic even i'm curious because
once it is just the isolated
living organisms that sounds to me
exactly like a probiotic so
what what's the difference and why
because the big thing i hear
the downside of probiotics is that they
don't survive digestion so
either they don't survive encapsulation
so they're already dead by the time you
take it
or if it survives encapsulation it
doesn't survive digestion and it gets
killed in the stomach
and doesn't make it to the actual
intestines so
what are the complications there and so
there are two topics
there are two topics one topic is
what sort of mix we are gonna have
first of all you are absolutely right
they are like probiotics
the difference the difference is you are
going to select
certain probiotic strains that will do
certain functions with the probiotic
don't do
before probiotic is a wild west
situation
really not a lot of information now
the national institute of health for
example
is putting what we call rfa request for
applications
from scientists so that they can put
proposals
to try to see okay are these probiotics
useful
what subset and this sort of thing so i
think we are going to see a better
refinement even though they will be
after all
we call them probiotic but they are
going to be selected
uh strains that have that will help us
in certain ways like for example i told
you
in autistic kids if they don't break
fiber
i don't want to take any old probiotic i
want a probiotic that is
able to like a strain that i would show
that it's going to break this fiber so
it's going to be personalized
it means personalized and more targeted
to a
given situation that is very interesting
so now let's talk about
what would make up that target so my
wife's microbiome just
decimated so what would you give
her would you give it based on the fact
that she's mediterranean
or what because you've said that people
break into basically three camps healthy
people fall into three
types of microbiomes it isn't it isn't
just every person
is completely individualized there is
individuality
but for the most part people fall into
roughly three camps would it be just
figuring out
which of those three camps she should be
in
and how do you decide that this is a
really very good question why because
okay how do we know one way now which
was advancement of science
and next generation sequencing we can
take
a fecal sample and characterize it we
can actually
make a profile of a given person and you
are absolutely right in our studies we
showed that
there are at least three different
profiles
but with and without fungus like some
the same profile could be with fungus or
without fungus so you have six in total
so when you for example with your wife
if we
can take a fecal sample we can analyze
that and
based on that you will be able to see
what sort of dysbiosis okay or what sort
of
imbalance there and then based on this
you need to start giving recommendation
nutritional
nutritional recommendations that will
improve the growth of this this guy
which we don't have
like for example if you have
protobacteria which is
pro-inflammatory or it's a red flag for
inflammation
i want to give the person
fiber i want to give them vitamin d3
because this have been shown to reduce
that
so you will start to make as you say
personalized
approaches to the uh
to rebalance your cut so i want to um go
a little deeper on
the timeline for the actual personalized
um sort of probiotic 2.0 or 3.0
where we get the fecal sample we
identify
where they're at we identify and i'm not
sure how but we identify
what of the roughly six groups they're
gonna they need to fall into
and then we create this cocktail for
them that they're gonna take and look
trust me when i say i buy into diet 100
i buy into lifestyle 100
um but you've talked about the fact that
diet and lifestyle is a change measured
in months or even
years whereas the mycobiome
the fungi can be adjusted in 24 hours
and i'm also hopeful that with this
cocktail that you're talking about what
we'll call probiotics 2.0
is faster right but i really want to
understand
are we are we 10 years away from
probiotics 2.0 are we 10 months away i
don't think it's 10 months away
but i don't think it's going to be 10
years i really believe
within the 5 year period
we should be able to get more look
if you think about that and our
understanding of the microbiome it's
just been maybe
just over 10 years 10 15 years okay so
the first stage we just wanted to
understand what is there
now we know also they cause issues
now we are entering into the future
which is the more exciting and will be
more
really relevant to a situation like your
wife where we are trying to understand
okay how can we balance it what sort of
strain do we need
and i'm you know i am an optimistic
person okay and because of this
i think we will reach there
within the coming uh five years i
i'm sure so going back to
the hot button issue of autism uh let's
talk about
is anybody doing um human
experimentation with autism and fmt and
if so what are the results
you know this there are a number of
companies that are
starting to look at autism and what they
are trying to do
is trying to see a subset of strains
that are gonna work
against against uh against them but they
are in clinical trials
they are not completed but i think again
i would expect within the coming three
years we will see
uh hopefully some some of these uh
strains are gonna work and when you say
work
do you think that you can have a
partial reduction in symptoms a total
reversal of symptoms
do you have to catch it by a certain age
or does the brain actually
develop differently um what do you think
that looks like
i think like for me where i am going
with autism i can tell you
because i've been thinking okay how can
we do a clinical trial
so that at the end of it we learn
something which can help these kids
and i would like to focus on the
gastrointestinal issues what issues
they have they have constipation they
are bloating
can we find a set of organisms
that are able to help them number one
digest the food better number two
rebalance
the gut okay and what i would like to do
i like two things to do number one i
really hope we can get a strain
that is able to break down fiber also
i hope that we have a sub
it's not going to be one most probably a
handful not
not too many as well which can
help them with respect to their
digestive symptoms
so it it has to work this way otherwise
it's really not not worth it has anybody
looked at
um so obviously the microbiome is
wildly involved in neurotransmitters
has anybody looked at autism and the
neurotransmitters so
if there's a correlation or causation
between the inability to break down
fiber
and neurotransmitters like i know that
short chain fatty acids for instance if
i'm understanding correctly
certainly lower inflammation which can
have tremendous impact on mood
so have people looked at
neurotransmitters in autism and tried to
link that to the microbiome
you know in autism it's not as advanced
but
i can tell you in crohn's disease
patients people are looking at it
and in this regard i was very happy
i got a national institute of health
grant and i actually grant to study
oral interactions between bacteria and
fungus
in crohn's disease and guess what we are
doing
apart from looking at the organisms we
also looking at the metabolomics
which is the metabolites production and
what we are hoping is
we are going to going to identify
compounds
that are say elevated in these
in these patients compared to their con
control or healthy people
and then that is gonna give you
a large number of molecules to look at
and
that and some of them may have
neurotransmitter effect
some of them have inflammatory effect
and so on and so forth
like in our study for example just to
make it put it into perspective
when we looked at organisms that when
they come
together that are pathogenic they we
found
299 metabolites
detected out of these we found
eight that are statistically significant
so now we are gonna focus on these eight
now do i know what they are what they do
i hope by the end of the five years but
that's where
you know definitely people are looking
at the metabolites and i think this is
the second wave that's where i believe
and now we are going to move in that
direction
so help me understand the um
the microbiome in general is at a
microbial
perspective anyway very hard to um
adjust but fungi can be adjusted
in your book you say in 24 hours yes one
why is it so much easier to
adjust and then two what do we hope or
what
actually comes out of that adjustment
yeah i think
when i said this there was a study
before we looked at what you call
by dr hoffman where he looked at
short-term diet
and long-term diet and when he compared
the bacteria and the fungus the
bacterial community and the fungal
community
he found that the fungi
is a short-term diet which means in a
short time
it can change okay whereas the bacteria
it is more sustainable it requires
long-term diet
and that's really where the first idea
came to us
the other thing why is that especially
if we eat
sugar for example fungi and the bad guys
love sugar and they grow very fast in a
way
they are you know they they are unlike
other molds such as asparagus or
penicillium
which they take or even dermatophytes
the organisms that
infect our nails and hair nails and skin
they take very long time to grow whereas
candida is very fast it's like bacteria
anyway
so that could account for how very
quickly you can populate that
or you can starve them as well at the
same time
very interesting so as we make the
adjustments we start eating the right
diet we lower our stress
we start working out all that what
like the microbiome the the fungus role
what does that control i think uh
first of all there are studies that have
shown that
the microbiome play a role in our
immunity for example
and i i i remember we gave an example
where they gave it
or threw me through they
influenced the ability or to secrete
more
cytokines they affect the immune cells
secrete more cytokines
also the fungi if they are overgrown
in this biofilm which i mentioned before
you know it's so interesting because
if you look at candida when it is sort
of in a way harmless
it's a yeast form it's like over little
like we know
with baker's east okay whereas when it
start to
grow it forms what you call the hyphy
it's like threads
it's like little thin threads
okay and this what they do they start to
break down our gut lining and once you
have
this breakdown of the gut lining you are
going to have leaky gut you are going to
have a lot
a lot of issues so so that's where
candida if it overgrows is not a good
idea however i don't want people to go
really so nervous about it 50
of us have candida in our gut you know
i did a study once with my students many
years ago
where i wanted to see do they carry
candida in their mouth
so i said okay guys let's do this this
is before i became
enlightened about the diet so i said
listen i need to take
a swap to culture canada and i'll give
you donuts
okay and you know students will will do
that for donuts they'll do it
so anyway what what happened we found
between
50 to 70 percent of the students has
canada
as long as it is at low level it's fine
the problem is when it overgrows in fact
when it is at low at
the level as i mentioned before it could
help help us with
uh fermentation food breakdown and this
sort of thing
and the reason that the donut is ironic
is that candida is able to consume that
sugar and grow and
proliferate yeah yeah that's uh that
makes a lot of sense so
that brings us into what are your diet
and lifestyle recommendations so for the
person that
they they have some level of dysbiosis
which i would say in a modern context
most people probably do what what does
as close to perfect as possible look
like
now i think uh our diet has it's a whole
food
natural food it has low in sugar
obviously because as we will be talking
about
we need to have uh mono and
polyunsaturated fats we don't want we
want to avoid the
saturated fats you need some good lean
proteins for example
from plants also from
chicken from fish is really great
i need to have some food like
cruciferous vegetables for example
for anti-inflammatory antioxidant these
are
really really good and also we need to
have
fibers such as resistant starch
is very good why because i want to
support the growth of the good bacteria
because those good guys is like
policemen they keep the other bad guys
under control
so that's a that's really from the
dietary point of view
all right so just walk me through you're
very specific in your book about what
people should eat
um what would an ideal day look like
what am i having for breakfast
am i intermittent fasting um am i
you know the eating one meal a day three
meals a day eight meals a day
like what does that look like let me let
me tell you what i do
i really uh now uh in the morning for
example i like
oatmeal very much i love a little bit of
honey
what not too much because of the sugar
but it's okay
and better than refined refined sugar so
my breakfast usually
is this way it's
oatmeal uh berries raisins
i have some prunes i i really like like
those and in the weekend
i enjoy uh having uh
eggs like omelet vegetable omelette and
this sort of thing
now during the day when i'm at at work i
like to have
you know snacks i love nuts especially
pistachio
and pistachio by the way have been shown
to be fantastic
with respect to the micro microbiome
better than almond
even though almonds are good but
pistachios are
much better at lunch time i tend to have
a salad and i you know i'm from the
mediterranean myself
like your your wife and i love i love
salad
and i don't want salad to be too complex
people sometimes add too many
ingredients to it i like to be simple
you know tomato
a cucumber spring onions of course olive
oil
you know and as well as garlic garlic it
is
fantastic and i can tell you i published
some work on garlic
you know it's a very interesting story
if you don't mind i tell you that no
please i know the story it's amazing
you know so i was working in kuwait for
many
many years i was professor at quite
university
before i came to the us and this kuwaiti
a friend of mine every morning he comes
to me you have to study garlic
i said go away i don't want to study
garlic every day
he said but then you know it's my friend
i say okay i'll study garlic so i did
and i published three papers on garlic
you know
and this is what brought me to the u.s
where they invited me to give a talk on
in a conference called first congress on
the biology of garlic
and they wanted me to talk about candida
of course i i
i was studying against candida and
garlic
is a fantastic thing i'm biased in more
than one way
so what what happened i was in england
with my family you know even though we
work in uh i i'm at kuwait university
i i came to england my wife is english
so we go to england every summer
and then saddam hussein decided to
occupy
kuwait so overnight i lost my job
and oh my god we were just one week of
going back to kuwait you know to there
to work
and then luckily i already had my visa
for the meeting and they i called them i
said listen send me the ticket to
england
and that's how i came to the us and of
course
i had a kind man help me
where uh gave me you know changed my
ticket and this sort of thing and then
i ended up getting two jobs
uh in one evening again honestly
i know these days we are all
a lot of anxiety and whatever but this
tells you
a fantastic thing about the us how
people
help and how other human beings help you
make a lot of difference in your life
and that's where
my story was garlic yeah it's a really
beautiful story man i
i've heard you talk about it a few times
and it's super touching that the
the guy was a travel agent if i'm not
mistaken yes and you'd asked him for
help because you were in dc for the
conference but you
now had to stay an extra week but you
had no money this is you know before
paypal and things like that so there's
no way for you to get a hold of any
money so you go to this travel agent who
you've never met ever in your life
and say look i have a friend in
milwaukee but i have to get back to dc
if i'm going to have any hope of getting
a job
so can you give me give me a ticket to
milwaukee and back to dc which he
does out of his own pocket yeah it's
really a beautiful story and i know
if i'm not mistaken now you have a
scholarship in his name
um to help pay that forward which i
think is really
yes yes yes we we went and we met with
his family unfortunately he passed away
february of last year it's a year ago
and now and it is really sad but
i tell you when we saw his family it was
fantastic and it made me feel so happy
and now we hope as you say we pay it
forward
to help somebody else because you know
like
i don't know if i will do it now but you
don't know when you are desperate about
something
i just want to him i said listen you are
the black guy you have to help me
you know tell me what the what the hell
is this guy talking about
i said listen i need help i you know
and honest god he just did it it's it's
amazing you know
but uh you know this is the good part of
the human nature which we
always need to think about and celebrate
you know
i love that and when you say coming to
america you need to be more opportunity
and it didn't matter who you were just
matter the results that you were able to
get here in america
and um your life is such extraordinary
proof of that you know one man's
kindness has turned into
an exceptional business and just as i
said in the intro
the amount of times that you've been
cited
400 papers 20 000 citations the the
contributions that you've
made off of that act of kindness is is
really pretty extraordinary
i tell you i tell you that kindness not
only changed my life my family is now
alive
completely you know i we came
when we were in england i had a little
boy five months
my son my eldest son hafif he was ten
year and my daughter emma
was seven years now they are all grown
up they are all
doing well so you know it's amazing
dr g man thank you so much this has
really been amazing i want to ask you
um if people want to connect with you if
they want to get your book
where do they go what's the best place
it's uh first of all they can go to
doctormicrobiome.com dr
microbiome.com that's we have a site
where
we are helping people to do some of the
stuff also
totalgatput.com and also it's in amazon
bars and nobel and all other places
so i really really enjoyed talking to
you
this was amazing man if you were gonna
have people make one change that would
have the biggest positive impact on
their health
what change would you have them make
you know i really would try like to
cut some of processed food if you can
cut some of the processed food because
that's where
a lot of the food that can help the
pro-inflammatory bacteria
grow in our garden so just there a
little bit to more
natural food eat you know as i mentioned
i am from mediterranean eat some
vegetables eat fruits and fish my friend
is fantastic
amazing dr g thank you guys so much
thank you so much and guys
man check him out he's amazing there's a
reason he's been sighted as much as he's
been cited
uh just an extraordinary thinker is
doing amazing research
definitely somebody to watch if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends
be a legendary take care
hey everyone there is no way to build an
empowering mindset or get ahead in
business without
constantly learning and accessing new
information
and today i want to share one of my
secret weapons in the battle to learn
new things and get ahead
for all of us who are ambitious and busy
it's almost impossible to find enough
time to sit down
and just read but thankfully there is a
practical app that solves that problem
and i highly recommend it the app is
called
blinkist blinkist condenses powerful
non-fiction books into bite-sized
text or audio you get the key takeaways
the need to know information from
the world's best non-fiction books in
just 15 minutes
you can read or listen to the 15-minute
encapsulations and start putting what
you learn into practice
right away this really allows you to
focus on
actually executing on the skills that
you're learning
blinkist works on your phone your tablet
or your web browser so it's accessible
pretty much anywhere you are
right now 12 million people are using
blinkist and it has a
massive and ever-growing library from
self-help business health to history
books blinkist has the
latest titles from bestseller lists as
well as the classic non-fiction titles
that you always
wanted to read but have never had the
time to two books from their library
that i've listened to
and highly recommend are start with why
by simon sinek and the power of habit by
charles duhigg
with blinkist you get unlimited access
to read or listen to
a massive library of condensed
non-fiction books
all the books you want and all for just
one low price and right now for a
limited time
blinkist has a special offer just for
our audience so
go to blinkist.com impact theory
try it free for seven days and save 25
off your new subscription that's
blinkist spelled
b l i n k i s t
dot com slash impact theory to start
your free
seven day trial and remember you also
will save 25
off but only when you sign up at
blinkist.com
impact theory alright guys give this one
a shot empower yourself learn new stuff
this one is going to be amazing all
right take care and be legendary
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset
cultivating grit and unlocking your full
potential
you